In this video we're learn about recursive functions and how to implement them in C++ a recursive function
is a function that calls itself the function can call itself directly or indirectly through another
function.
If we end up with two or more activation records on the stack for the same function then we have recursion
recursion is great for certain classes of problems.
Recursive problem solving is something that most programmers have a little trouble doing when they first
learn that's normal.
Eventually you'll understand that recursive solutions make sense in certain cases.
There are many types of recursive problems that lend themselves well to a recursive solution.
In mathematics we have factorial Fibonacci numbers fractals and many more is searching and sorting we
have binary searches search trees depth first search graphs and also many more.
There are also classic problems like the Towers of Hanoi that can really be hard to solve with a non-recursive
solution.
Let's see how we can calculate the factorial of a number using recursion.
Here we see the definition for factorial as you would find in a math book.
Factorial is defined in terms of itself.
That's what recursion is all about.
We have a base case.
So in this case factorial of 0 is one by definition and we have the recursive case factorial event or
factorial is equal to end times and minus one factorial.
See the recursion there.
Let's see how we can implement this in C++.
So let's look at the code starting at Main.
We call factorial and Pessin an 8 to the factorial function.
When the factorial function returns the value returned will be output to the console.
In this case we expect 40000 320.
OK so now let's look at the factorial function itself.
First we need to decide what types will accept and return the factorial function can generate massively
huge numbers.
So in this case I'm using unsigned long long as the return type and the parameter type.
This can hold very very large positive integers but we can still get an overflow even with such a big
number.
If you look at the code for the factorial function it looks exactly like the mathematical definition
of factorial.
We check a base case.
In this case if any is equal to zero we return 1.
Remember the return knocks you out of the function immediately.
Otherwise we return the result of calling the factorial function again with and minus one.
So in this case it would be return N times call factorial with n minus 1.
There is the recursion the base case is super important since it's what stops the recursion.
Otherwise we will recurse indefinitely and eventually we'd run out of stack space and get a stack overflow
error in a bit we'll head over to the ID and I'll walk you step by step in detail through an example
call to factorial so you can see exactly what's happening on the stack.
Let's look at calculating a Fibonacci number.
Now here's the definition for Fibonacci number.
There are two base cases Fibonacci of 0 0 and Fibonacci of 1 is 1 and the recursive case is Fibonacci
of N is equal to Fibonacci of and minus one plus the Fibonacci of and minus 2.
Again notice the recursive definition Fibonacci is defined in terms of itself.
I think you can see how to implement this in C++.
Again I've decided to use unsigned long long since Fibonacci can also produce huge numbers.
Notice in the main I call Fibonacci.
And the result I expect back is 830 2040.
Now let's look at the Fibonacci function.
Notice the handling of the base cases.
If any is less than or equal to 1 then we simply return.
And so when end is zero we return 0 and when end is 1 we return one that handles both base cases in
one step.
We could easily rewrite this condition to explicitly check and equals zero and equals 1.
But this achieves the same result.
This base case is what stops the recursion if and is not 0 or 1.
Then we call Fibonacci again with both pieces of the problem definition.
Eventually the recursion will stop and the result will be returned to main.
Notice how much the code looks like the mathematical definition of Fibonacci.
This is by design.
Let me give you a few thoughts on recursion.
Remember recursion is a form of iteration.
So anything that can be done recursively can also be done with iteration and vice versa.
Use recursion only when it makes sense.
The problem must lend itself to a recursive solution.
Don't use recursion to count from 1 to 10.
Remember the base cases.
They are what stops the recursion and are super important because of the call stack recursion can be
quite resource intensive.
Especially if you have very deep recursion.
It's not uncommon when you're first learning recursion to recurse indefinitely and run out of stack
space resulting in a stack overflow where that's perfectly fine.
This is how you learn.
I can't tell you how many times in my career I've seen recursive functions rewritten to iterative solutions
because of resource issues.
Generally an iterative solution to a recursively defined problem is less elegant and more difficult
to understand in code but sometimes we have to meet nonfunctional requirements and that's what it takes.
Let's head over to the idea and walk through a factorial example in detail.
So I'm in the idealy I'm in the sectional Levan workspace and there are two projects that are interesting
here that both use recursive functions.
One is the Fibonacci project to this effect.
Tauriel project went through a detailed example of how factorial works recursively in a minute.
But here's Fibonacci and it's just like I wrote in the slides.
So here in the main I'm calculating the Fibonacci number for 530 and 40.
You can see the forties pretty large if you try to do like a Fibonacci of 50 or something like that.
It's going to take a while because there's a lot of recursion going on.
It all depends on how fast your machine is even here when I do a Fibonacci of 40 I'll run this and you'll
see a little bit of a delay.
You see that it took just over a second delay there to actually calculate that Fibonacci number and
it's a pretty large number.
But once you start getting to really large numbers here for example 45 50 then the recursion is just
tremendous and it takes a lot to solve those problems.
OK so let me go back to factorial.
And when I really want to go over here.
So here's the factorial just like we wrote it.
The factorial of some number.
And there's four examples here you can see factorial three is six factorial betas 43 20 and so forth.
You could see the factorial of 20 is a really big number.
And as this number grows here that number really grows big time.
So let me run this and you can see it's really fast here but once you start really increasing that number
there it's going to slow down big time.
Now what I want to do is I want to I'm going to come at this out just for a minute because I'm only
interested in factorial of three.
I want to walk through a stack example of exactly what's going on when we call factorial with a 3.
We could do a four or five or six if we did that we'd be here all day drawing stuff on the stack because
of the recursion threes an easy number.
It will be pretty easy to do in a stack and it will take so long that you'll understand exactly what's
happening and whether he's three or four or five we'll understand.
OK.
So let's do that now.
So here's my stack and my main is on the stack and all man is doing is it's outputting the result of
factorial with the three.
So I'm just going to use fact rather than write out the entire word factorial so Maine is calling factorial
with a three.
And the result he gets back it's going to output right.
OK so that's simple enough.
So what happens.
Well Maine calls that function factorial.
Right.
So we're going to activate that function and we'll put it on the stack so main is going to call factorial
with the three.
So here's the activation record for factorial from this call right here from Maine.
Notice the factorial function right here has one local variable.
And so we need to allocate storage for it and let's say that that's And right here.
And what's the value for.
Well in this case it's three right and passing three into this function.
So end is going to get a 3 and I'm going to write the code right here in the stack.
The code doesn't exist on the stack.
It exists somewhere else.
But here you'll be able to follow it easier I think.
So what do we do we start executing the code is equal to zero.
No and is equal to three.
So what do I do.
I return I'm going to shoot right in which is three times factorial of and minus one well three minus
one is two.
So we need to call that function.
So what do we do again.
We transfer control to the other function.
What other function is it.
It's the same one we're just calling it recursively.
So in this case what am I doing I'm calling factorial with two factorial has an N.
So we need to allocate storage for an end it's just another activation record.
In this case it is to let's start executing is equal to zero.
No.
So I want to return N which is two times factorial of and minus one will to minus 1 is 1.
So I'm going to do that.
Now notice what just happened.
I've got two activation records on the stack for the same function.
That's the definition of recursion.
All right so now what are we going to.
We're going to call factorial with a 1
and you can see the stack just growing right.
Well factorials the same function it's got an n.
In this case I'm calling it the one I'm passing the end by value so there's the one.
And what does it do is any call to zero.
No.
So it's going to return N which is 1 times factorial of and minus 1 which in this case is zero.
So what do I do.
Again I stop and I call factorial again.
In this case with zero.
So let's do that.
Here we're going to call factorial with zero
and gets zero.
Now we're here.
This is the base case.
Finally we're going to start unwinding is equal to zero.
Yes.
So what do I do.
I return 1 return 1 to who.
To whoever called me.
Well here's the call right here.
So the value of that call will be 1.
OK.
And now what we do is we start unwinding.
So this gets popped off the stack
it now we're here.
Well this guy can now return as well right.
So it's going to return what it's going to return.
One times one one time one to two this guy right here.
So one times one is one and we're going to pop off the stack.
So this function now is gone.
That activation record gets cleaned up.
And we're here right.
So hopefully everybody's with me.
It's pretty straightforward.
It's just a matter of keeping all your ducks in a row.
So here we're going to return to times one which is to who to this function call that's devaluate that
function call.
That's the two.
And again we're going to clean up the stack it gets popped off an activation record always.
All those areas in the stack that we allocated are gone.
So now we're here finally we can calculate this result which is three times two which is six.
So we're going to return six to who this guy is the one that called me.
That's a six right there right.
The value of that function call is a six.
What are we going to do now.
Pop off the stack.
We're cleaning up.
Finally you see that's that's called unwinding from a recursive call.
So we're here now we've got six.
And what do we do with the six.
We put it and that's the final result of the call to factorial with a three as you can see it's pretty
straightforward.
It's a matter of your recursive calls get pushed on the stack and then you start unwinding the unwinding
is starting right there.
That's the critical piece that base case.
If you forget that base case or get it wrong then this would just keep going and going and eventually
you're going to run out of stack space and get a stack overflow error.
OK.
So there you go.
Obviously if you remember the Fibonacci function it's more complicated than this.
Right because I mean when we go back to us you can see the Fibonacci function which was right here has
two pieces of recursion right.
So we're going to have to call recursive functions calling itself obviously but it's calling it twice
per call.
So the amount of stack space that's used is larger.
That's why Fibonacci takes longer than factorial to execute especially with very large numbers.
OK.
So hopefully this diagram helps recursion makes a lot of sense once you understand what's really going
on on the stack.
I think it totally makes sense.